I scarcely know where to begin, though I sometimes facetiously place the
cause of it all to Charley Furuseth’s credit.  He kept a summer cottage
in Mill Valley, under the shadow of Mount Tamalpais, and never occupied
it except when he loafed through the winter months and read Nietzsche and
Schopenhauer to rest his brain.  When summer came on, he elected to sweat
out a hot and dusty existence in the city and to toil incessantly.  Had
it not been my custom to run up to see him every Saturday afternoon and
to stop over till Monday morning, this particular January Monday morning
would not have found me afloat on San Francisco Bay.

Not but that I was afloat in a safe craft, for the  Martinez  was a new
ferry-steamer, making her fourth or fifth trip on the run between
Sausalito and San Francisco.  The danger lay in the heavy fog which
blanketed the bay, and of which, as a landsman, I had little
apprehension.  In fact, I remember the placid exaltation with which I
took up my position on the forward upper deck, directly beneath the
pilot-house, and allowed the mystery of the fog to lay hold of my
imagination.  A fresh breeze was blowing, and for a time I was alone in
the moist obscurity yet not alone, for I was dimly conscious of the
presence of the pilot, and of what I took to be the captain, in the glass
house above my head.

I remember thinking how comfortable it was, this division of labour which
made it unnecessary for me to study fogs, winds, tides, and navigation,
in order to visit my friend who lived across an arm of the sea.  It was
good that men should be specialists, I mused.  The peculiar knowledge of
the pilot and captain sufficed for many thousands of people who knew no
more of the sea and navigation than I knew.  On the other hand, instead
of having to devote my energy to the learning of a multitude of things, I
concentrated it upon a few particular things, such as, for instance, the
analysis of Poe’s place in American literature an essay of mine, by the
way, in the current  Atlantic.  Coming aboard, as I passed through the
cabin, I had noticed with greedy eyes a stout gentleman reading the
 Atlantic, which was open at my very essay.  And there it was again, the
division of labour, the special knowledge of the pilot and captain which
permitted the stout gentleman to read my special knowledge on Poe while
they carried him safely from Sausalito to San Francisco.

A red-faced man, slamming the cabin door behind him and stumping out on
the deck, interrupted my reflections, though I made a mental note of the
topic for use in a projected essay which I had thought of calling “The
Necessity for Freedom: A Plea for the Artist.”  The red-faced man shot a
glance up at the pilot-house, gazed around at the fog, stumped across the
deck and back (he evidently had artificial legs), and stood still by my
side, legs wide apart, and with an expression of keen enjoyment on his
face.  I was not wrong when I decided that his days had been spent on the
sea.

“It’s nasty weather like this here that turns heads grey before their
time,” he said, with a nod toward the pilot-house.

“I had not thought there was any particular strain,” I answered.  “It
seems as simple as A, B, C.  They know the direction by compass, the
distance, and the speed.  I should not call it anything more than
mathematical certainty.”

“Strain!” he snorted.  “Simple as A, B, C!  Mathematical certainty!”

He seemed to brace himself up and lean backward against the air as he
stared at me.  “How about this here tide that’s rushin’ out through the
Golden Gate?” he demanded, or bellowed, rather.  “How fast is she ebbin’?
What’s the drift, eh?  Listen to that, will you?  A bell-buoy, and we’re
a-top of it!  See ’em alterin’ the course!”

From out of the fog came the mournful tolling of a bell, and I could see
the pilot turning the wheel with great rapidity.  The bell, which had
seemed straight ahead, was now sounding from the side.  Our own whistle
was blowing hoarsely, and from time to time the sound of other whistles
came to us from out of the fog.

“That’s a ferry-boat of some sort,” the new-comer said, indicating a
whistle off to the right.  “And there!  D’ye hear that?  Blown by mouth.
Some scow schooner, most likely.  Better watch out, Mr. Schooner-man.
Ah, I thought so.  Now hell’s a poppin’ for somebody!”

The unseen ferry-boat was blowing blast after blast, and the mouth-blown
horn was tooting in terror-stricken fashion.

“And now they’re payin’ their respects to each other and tryin’ to get
clear,” the red-faced man went on, as the hurried whistling ceased.

His face was shining, his eyes flashing with excitement as he translated
into articulate language the speech of the horns and sirens.  “That’s a
steam-siren a-goin’ it over there to the left.  And you hear that fellow
with a frog in his throat a steam schooner as near as I can judge,
crawlin’ in from the Heads against the tide.”

A shrill little whistle, piping as if gone mad, came from directly ahead
and from very near at hand.  Gongs sounded on the  Martinez.  Our
paddle-wheels stopped, their pulsing beat died away, and then they
started again.  The shrill little whistle, like the chirping of a cricket
amid the cries of great beasts, shot through the fog from more to the
side and swiftly grew faint and fainter.  I looked to my companion for
enlightenment.

“One of them dare-devil launches,” he said.  “I almost wish we’d sunk
him, the little rip!  They’re the cause of more trouble.  And what good
are they?  Any jackass gets aboard one and runs it from hell to
breakfast, blowin’ his whistle to beat the band and tellin’ the rest of
the world to look out for him, because he’s comin’ and can’t look out for
himself!  Because he’s comin’!  And you’ve got to look out, too!  Right
of way!  Common decency!  They don’t know the meanin’ of it!”

I felt quite amused at his unwarranted choler, and while he stumped
indignantly up and down I fell to dwelling upon the romance of the fog.
And romantic it certainly was the fog, like the grey shadow of infinite
mystery, brooding over the whirling speck of earth; and men, mere motes
of light and sparkle, cursed with an insane relish for work, riding their
steeds of wood and steel through the heart of the mystery, groping their
way blindly through the Unseen, and clamouring and clanging in confident
speech the while their hearts are heavy with incertitude and fear.

The voice of my companion brought me back to myself with a laugh.  I too
had been groping and floundering, the while I thought I rode clear-eyed
through the mystery.

“Hello! somebody comin’ our way,” he was saying.  “And d’ye hear that?
He’s comin’ fast.  Walking right along.  Guess he don’t hear us yet.
Wind’s in wrong direction.”

The fresh breeze was blowing right down upon us, and I could hear the
whistle plainly, off to one side and a little ahead.

“Ferry-boat?” I asked.

He nodded, then added, “Or he wouldn’t be keepin’ up such a clip.”  He
gave a short chuckle.  “They’re gettin’ anxious up there.”

I glanced up.  The captain had thrust his head and shoulders out of the
pilot-house, and was staring intently into the fog as though by sheer
force of will he could penetrate it.  His face was anxious, as was the
face of my companion, who had stumped over to the rail and was gazing
with a like intentness in the direction of the invisible danger.

Then everything happened, and with inconceivable rapidity.  The fog
seemed to break away as though split by a wedge, and the bow of a
steamboat emerged, trailing fog-wreaths on either side like seaweed on
the snout of Leviathan.  I could see the pilot-house and a white-bearded
man leaning partly out of it, on his elbows.  He was clad in a blue
uniform, and I remember noting how trim and quiet he was.  His quietness,
under the circumstances, was terrible.  He accepted Destiny, marched hand
in hand with it, and coolly measured the stroke.  As he leaned there, he
ran a calm and speculative eye over us, as though to determine the
precise point of the collision, and took no notice whatever when our
pilot, white with rage, shouted, “Now you’ve done it!”

On looking back, I realize that the remark was too obvious to make
rejoinder necessary.

“Grab hold of something and hang on,” the red-faced man said to me.  All
his bluster had gone, and he seemed to have caught the contagion of
preternatural calm.  “And listen to the women scream,” he said
grimly almost bitterly, I thought, as though he had been through the
experience before.

The vessels came together before I could follow his advice.  We must have
been struck squarely amidships, for I saw nothing, the strange steamboat
having passed beyond my line of vision.  The  Martinez  heeled over,
sharply, and there was a crashing and rending of timber.  I was thrown
flat on the wet deck, and before I could scramble to my feet I heard the
scream of the women.  This it was, I am certain, the most indescribable
of blood-curdling sounds, that threw me into a panic.  I remembered the
life-preservers stored in the cabin, but was met at the door and swept
backward by a wild rush of men and women.  What happened in the next few
minutes I do not recollect, though I have a clear remembrance of pulling
down life-preservers from the overhead racks, while the red-faced man
fastened them about the bodies of an hysterical group of women.  This
memory is as distinct and sharp as that of any picture I have seen.  It
is a picture, and I can see it now, the jagged edges of the hole in the
side of the cabin, through which the grey fog swirled and eddied; the
empty upholstered seats, littered with all the evidences of sudden
flight, such as packages, hand satchels, umbrellas, and wraps; the stout
gentleman who had been reading my essay, encased in cork and canvas, the
magazine still in his hand, and asking me with monotonous insistence if I
thought there was any danger; the red-faced man, stumping gallantly
around on his artificial legs and buckling life-preservers on all comers;
and finally, the screaming bedlam of women.

This it was, the screaming of the women, that most tried my nerves.  It
must have tried, too, the nerves of the red-faced man, for I have another
picture which will never fade from my mind.  The stout gentleman is
stuffing the magazine into his overcoat pocket and looking on curiously.
A tangled mass of women, with drawn, white faces and open mouths, is
shrieking like a chorus of lost souls; and the red-faced man, his face
now purplish with wrath, and with arms extended overhead as in the act of
hurling thunderbolts, is shouting, “Shut up!  Oh, shut up!”

I remember the scene impelled me to sudden laughter, and in the next
instant I realized I was becoming hysterical myself; for these were women
of my own kind, like my mother and sisters, with the fear of death upon
them and unwilling to die.  And I remember that the sounds they made
reminded me of the squealing of pigs under the knife of the butcher, and
I was struck with horror at the vividness of the analogy.  These women,
capable of the most sublime emotions, of the tenderest sympathies, were
open-mouthed and screaming.  They wanted to live, they were helpless,
like rats in a trap, and they screamed.

The horror of it drove me out on deck.  I was feeling sick and squeamish,
and sat down on a bench.  In a hazy way I saw and heard men rushing and
shouting as they strove to lower the boats.  It was just as I had read
descriptions of such scenes in books.  The tackles jammed.  Nothing
worked.  One boat lowered away with the plugs out, filled with women and
children and then with water, and capsized.  Another boat had been
lowered by one end, and still hung in the tackle by the other end, where
it had been abandoned.  Nothing was to be seen of the strange steamboat
which had caused the disaster, though I heard men saying that she would
undoubtedly send boats to our assistance.

I descended to the lower deck.  The  Martinez  was sinking fast, for the
water was very near.  Numbers of the passengers were leaping overboard.
Others, in the water, were clamouring to be taken aboard again.  No one
heeded them.  A cry arose that we were sinking.  I was seized by the
consequent panic, and went over the side in a surge of bodies.  How I
went over I do not know, though I did know, and instantly, why those in
the water were so desirous of getting back on the steamer.  The water was
cold so cold that it was painful.  The pang, as I plunged into it, was as
quick and sharp as that of fire.  It bit to the marrow.  It was like the
grip of death.  I gasped with the anguish and shock of it, filling my
lungs before the life-preserver popped me to the surface.  The taste of
the salt was strong in my mouth, and I was strangling with the acrid
stuff in my throat and lungs.

But it was the cold that was most distressing.  I felt that I could
survive but a few minutes.  People were struggling and floundering in the
water about me.  I could hear them crying out to one another.  And I
heard, also, the sound of oars.  Evidently the strange steamboat had
lowered its boats.  As the time went by I marvelled that I was still
alive.  I had no sensation whatever in my lower limbs, while a chilling
numbness was wrapping about my heart and creeping into it.  Small waves,
with spiteful foaming crests, continually broke over me and into my
mouth, sending me off into more strangling paroxysms.

The noises grew indistinct, though I heard a final and despairing chorus
of screams in the distance, and knew that the  Martinez  had gone down.
Later, how much later I have no knowledge, I came to myself with a start
of fear.  I was alone.  I could hear no calls or cries only the sound of
the waves, made weirdly hollow and reverberant by the fog.  A panic in a
crowd, which partakes of a sort of community of interest, is not so
terrible as a panic when one is by oneself; and such a panic I now
suffered.  Whither was I drifting?  The red-faced man had said that the
tide was ebbing through the Golden Gate.  Was I, then, being carried out
to sea?  And the life-preserver in which I floated?  Was it not liable to
go to pieces at any moment?  I had heard of such things being made of
paper and hollow rushes which quickly became saturated and lost all
buoyancy.  And I could not swim a stroke.  And I was alone, floating,
apparently, in the midst of a grey primordial vastness.  I confess that a
madness seized me, that I shrieked aloud as the women had shrieked, and
beat the water with my numb hands.

How long this lasted I have no conception, for a blankness intervened, of
which I remember no more than one remembers of troubled and painful
sleep.  When I aroused, it was as after centuries of time; and I saw,
almost above me and emerging from the fog, the bow of a vessel, and three
triangular sails, each shrewdly lapping the other and filled with wind.
Where the bow cut the water there was a great foaming and gurgling, and I
seemed directly in its path.  I tried to cry out, but was too exhausted.
The bow plunged down, just missing me and sending a swash of water clear
over my head.  Then the long, black side of the vessel began slipping
past, so near that I could have touched it with my hands.  I tried to
reach it, in a mad resolve to claw into the wood with my nails, but my
arms were heavy and lifeless.  Again I strove to call out, but made no
sound.

The stern of the vessel shot by, dropping, as it did so, into a hollow
between the waves; and I caught a glimpse of a man standing at the wheel,
and of another man who seemed to be doing little else than smoke a cigar.
I saw the smoke issuing from his lips as he slowly turned his head and
glanced out over the water in my direction.  It was a careless,
unpremeditated glance, one of those haphazard things men do when they
have no immediate call to do anything in particular, but act because they
are alive and must do something.

But life and death were in that glance.  I could see the vessel being
swallowed up in the fog; I saw the back of the man at the wheel, and the
head of the other man turning, slowly turning, as his gaze struck the
water and casually lifted along it toward me.  His face wore an absent
expression, as of deep thought, and I became afraid that if his eyes did
light upon me he would nevertheless not see me.  But his eyes did light
upon me, and looked squarely into mine; and he did see me, for he sprang
to the wheel, thrusting the other man aside, and whirled it round and
round, hand over hand, at the same time shouting orders of some sort.
The vessel seemed to go off at a tangent to its former course and leapt
almost instantly from view into the fog.

I felt myself slipping into unconsciousness, and tried with all the power
of my will to fight above the suffocating blankness and darkness that was
rising around me.  A little later I heard the stroke of oars, growing
nearer and nearer, and the calls of a man.  When he was very near I heard
him crying, in vexed fashion, “Why in hell don’t you sing out?”  This
meant me, I thought, and then the blankness and darkness rose over me.




I seemed swinging in a mighty rhythm through orbit vastness.  Sparkling
points of light spluttered and shot past me.  They were stars, I knew,
and flaring comets, that peopled my flight among the suns.  As I reached
the limit of my swing and prepared to rush back on the counter swing, a
great gong struck and thundered.  For an immeasurable period, lapped in
the rippling of placid centuries, I enjoyed and pondered my tremendous
flight.

But a change came over the face of the dream, for a dream I told myself
it must be.  My rhythm grew shorter and shorter.  I was jerked from swing
to counter swing with irritating haste.  I could scarcely catch my
breath, so fiercely was I impelled through the heavens.  The gong
thundered more frequently and more furiously.  I grew to await it with a
nameless dread.  Then it seemed as though I were being dragged over
rasping sands, white and hot in the sun.  This gave place to a sense of
intolerable anguish.  My skin was scorching in the torment of fire.  The
gong clanged and knelled.  The sparkling points of light flashed past me
in an interminable stream, as though the whole sidereal system were
dropping into the void.  I gasped, caught my breath painfully, and opened
my eyes.  Two men were kneeling beside me, working over me.  My mighty
rhythm was the lift and forward plunge of a ship on the sea.  The
terrific gong was a frying-pan, hanging on the wall, that rattled and
clattered with each leap of the ship.  The rasping, scorching sands were
a man’s hard hands chafing my naked chest.  I squirmed under the pain of
it, and half lifted my head.  My chest was raw and red, and I could see
tiny blood globules starting through the torn and inflamed cuticle.

“That’ll do, Yonson,” one of the men said.  “Carn’t yer see you’ve
bloomin’ well rubbed all the gent’s skin orf?”

The man addressed as Yonson, a man of the heavy Scandinavian type, ceased
chafing me, and arose awkwardly to his feet.  The man who had spoken to
him was clearly a Cockney, with the clean lines and weakly pretty, almost
effeminate, face of the man who has absorbed the sound of Bow Bells with
his mother’s milk.  A draggled muslin cap on his head and a dirty
gunny-sack about his slim hips proclaimed him cook of the decidedly dirty
ship’s galley in which I found myself.

“An’ ’ow yer feelin’ now, sir?” he asked, with the subservient smirk
which comes only of generations of tip-seeking ancestors.

For reply, I twisted weakly into a sitting posture, and was helped by
Yonson to my feet.  The rattle and bang of the frying-pan was grating
horribly on my nerves.  I could not collect my thoughts.  Clutching the
woodwork of the galley for support, and I confess the grease with which
it was scummed put my teeth on edge, I reached across a hot cooking-range
to the offending utensil, unhooked it, and wedged it securely into the
coal-box.

The cook grinned at my exhibition of nerves, and thrust into my hand a
steaming mug with an “’Ere, this’ll do yer good.”  It was a nauseous
mess, ship’s coffee, but the heat of it was revivifying.  Between gulps
of the molten stuff I glanced down at my raw and bleeding chest and
turned to the Scandinavian.

“Thank you, Mr. Yonson,” I said; “but don’t you think your measures were
rather heroic?”

It was because he understood the reproof of my action, rather than of my
words, that he held up his palm for inspection.  It was remarkably
calloused.  I passed my hand over the horny projections, and my teeth
went on edge once more from the horrible rasping sensation produced.

“My name is Johnson, not Yonson,” he said, in very good, though slow,
English, with no more than a shade of accent to it.

There was mild protest in his pale blue eyes, and withal a timid
frankness and manliness that quite won me to him.

“Thank you, Mr. Johnson,” I corrected, and reached out my hand for his.

He hesitated, awkward and bashful, shifted his weight from one leg to the
other, then blunderingly gripped my hand in a hearty shake.

“Have you any dry clothes I may put on?” I asked the cook.

“Yes, sir,” he answered, with cheerful alacrity.  “I’ll run down an’ tyke
a look over my kit, if you’ve no objections, sir, to wearin’ my things.”

He dived out of the galley door, or glided rather, with a swiftness and
smoothness of gait that struck me as being not so much cat-like as oily.
In fact, this oiliness, or greasiness, as I was later to learn, was
probably the most salient expression of his personality.

“And where am I?” I asked Johnson, whom I took, and rightly, to be one of
the sailors.  “What vessel is this, and where is she bound?”

“Off the Farallones, heading about sou-west,” he answered, slowly and
methodically, as though groping for his best English, and rigidly
observing the order of my queries.  “The schooner  Ghost, bound
seal-hunting to Japan.”

“And who is the captain?  I must see him as soon as I am dressed.”

Johnson looked puzzled and embarrassed.  He hesitated while he groped in
his vocabulary and framed a complete answer.  “The cap’n is Wolf Larsen,
or so men call him.  I never heard his other name.  But you better speak
soft with him.  He is mad this morning.  The mate ”

But he did not finish.  The cook had glided in.

“Better sling yer ’ook out of ’ere, Yonson,” he said.  “The old man’ll be
wantin’ yer on deck, an’ this ayn’t no d’y to fall foul of ’im.”

Johnson turned obediently to the door, at the same time, over the cook’s
shoulder, favouring me with an amazingly solemn and portentous wink as
though to emphasize his interrupted remark and the need for me to be
soft-spoken with the captain.

Hanging over the cook’s arm was a loose and crumpled array of
evil-looking and sour-smelling garments.

“They was put aw’y wet, sir,” he vouchsafed explanation.  “But you’ll
’ave to make them do till I dry yours out by the fire.”

Clinging to the woodwork, staggering with the roll of the ship, and aided
by the cook, I managed to slip into a rough woollen undershirt.  On the
instant my flesh was creeping and crawling from the harsh contact.  He
noticed my involuntary twitching and grimacing, and smirked:

“I only ’ope yer don’t ever ’ave to get used to such as that in this
life, ’cos you’ve got a bloomin’ soft skin, that you ’ave, more like a
lydy’s than any I know of.  I was bloomin’ well sure you was a gentleman
as soon as I set eyes on yer.”

I had taken a dislike to him at first, and as he helped to dress me this
dislike increased.  There was something repulsive about his touch.  I
shrank from his hand; my flesh revolted.  And between this and the smells
arising from various pots boiling and bubbling on the galley fire, I was
in haste to get out into the fresh air.  Further, there was the need of
seeing the captain about what arrangements could be made for getting me
ashore.

A cheap cotton shirt, with frayed collar and a bosom discoloured with
what I took to be ancient blood-stains, was put on me amid a running and
apologetic fire of comment.  A pair of workman’s brogans encased my feet,
and for trousers I was furnished with a pair of pale blue, washed-out
overalls, one leg of which was fully ten inches shorter than the other.
The abbreviated leg looked as though the devil had there clutched for the
Cockney’s soul and missed the shadow for the substance.

“And whom have I to thank for this kindness?” I asked, when I stood
completely arrayed, a tiny boy’s cap on my head, and for coat a dirty,
striped cotton jacket which ended at the small of my back and the sleeves
of which reached just below my elbows.

The cook drew himself up in a smugly humble fashion, a deprecating smirk
on his face.  Out of my experience with stewards on the Atlantic liners
at the end of the voyage, I could have sworn he was waiting for his tip.
From my fuller knowledge of the creature I now know that the posture was
unconscious.  An hereditary servility, no doubt, was responsible.

“Mugridge, sir,” he fawned, his effeminate features running into a greasy
smile.  “Thomas Mugridge, sir, an’ at yer service.”

“All right, Thomas,” I said.  “I shall not forget you when my clothes are
dry.”

A soft light suffused his face and his eyes glistened, as though
somewhere in the deeps of his being his ancestors had quickened and
stirred with dim memories of tips received in former lives.

“Thank you, sir,” he said, very gratefully and very humbly indeed.

Precisely in the way that the door slid back, he slid aside, and I
stepped out on deck.  I was still weak from my prolonged immersion.  A
puff of wind caught me, and I staggered across the moving deck to a
corner of the cabin, to which I clung for support.  The schooner, heeled
over far out from the perpendicular, was bowing and plunging into the
long Pacific roll.  If she were heading south-west as Johnson had said,
the wind, then, I calculated, was blowing nearly from the south.  The fog
was gone, and in its place the sun sparkled crisply on the surface of the
water, I turned to the east, where I knew California must lie, but could
see nothing save low-lying fog-banks the same fog, doubtless, that had
brought about the disaster to the  Martinez  and placed me in my present
situation.  To the north, and not far away, a group of naked rocks thrust
above the sea, on one of which I could distinguish a lighthouse.  In the
south-west, and almost in our course, I saw the pyramidal loom of some
vessel’s sails.

Having completed my survey of the horizon, I turned to my more immediate
surroundings.  My first thought was that a man who had come through a
collision and rubbed shoulders with death merited more attention than I
received.  Beyond a sailor at the wheel who stared curiously across the
top of the cabin, I attracted no notice whatever.

Everybody seemed interested in what was going on amid ships.  There, on a
hatch, a large man was lying on his back.  He was fully clothed, though
his shirt was ripped open in front.  Nothing was to be seen of his chest,
however, for it was covered with a mass of black hair, in appearance like
the furry coat of a dog.  His face and neck were hidden beneath a black
beard, intershot with grey, which would have been stiff and bushy had it
not been limp and draggled and dripping with water.  His eyes were
closed, and he was apparently unconscious; but his mouth was wide open,
his breast, heaving as though from suffocation as he laboured noisily for
breath.  A sailor, from time to time and quite methodically, as a matter
of routine, dropped a canvas bucket into the ocean at the end of a rope,
hauled it in hand under hand, and sluiced its contents over the prostrate
man.

Pacing back and forth the length of the hatchways and savagely chewing
the end of a cigar, was the man whose casual glance had rescued me from
the sea.  His height was probably five feet ten inches, or ten and a
half; but my first impression, or feel of the man, was not of this, but
of his strength.  And yet, while he was of massive build, with broad
shoulders and deep chest, I could not characterize his strength as
massive.  It was what might be termed a sinewy, knotty strength, of the
kind we ascribe to lean and wiry men, but which, in him, because of his
heavy build, partook more of the enlarged gorilla order.  Not that in
appearance he seemed in the least gorilla-like.  What I am striving to
express is this strength itself, more as a thing apart from his physical
semblance.  It was a strength we are wont to associate with things
primitive, with wild animals, and the creatures we imagine our
tree-dwelling prototypes to have been a strength savage, ferocious, alive
in itself, the essence of life in that it is the potency of motion, the
elemental stuff itself out of which the many forms of life have been
moulded; in short, that which writhes in the body of a snake when the
head is cut off, and the snake, as a snake, is dead, or which lingers in
the shapeless lump of turtle-meat and recoils and quivers from the prod
of a finger.

Such was the impression of strength I gathered from this man who paced up
and down.  He was firmly planted on his legs; his feet struck the deck
squarely and with surety; every movement of a muscle, from the heave of
the shoulders to the tightening of the lips about the cigar, was
decisive, and seemed to come out of a strength that was excessive and
overwhelming.  In fact, though this strength pervaded every action of
his, it seemed but the advertisement of a greater strength that lurked
within, that lay dormant and no more than stirred from time to time, but
which might arouse, at any moment, terrible and compelling, like the rage
of a lion or the wrath of a storm.

The cook stuck his head out of the galley door and grinned encouragingly
at me, at the same time jerking his thumb in the direction of the man who
paced up and down by the hatchway.  Thus I was given to understand that
he was the captain, the “Old Man,” in the cook’s vernacular, the
individual whom I must interview and put to the trouble of somehow
getting me ashore.  I had half started forward, to get over with what I
was certain would be a stormy five minutes, when a more violent
suffocating paroxysm seized the unfortunate person who was lying on his
back.  He wrenched and writhed about convulsively.  The chin, with the
damp black beard, pointed higher in the air as the back muscles stiffened
and the chest swelled in an unconscious and instinctive effort to get
more air.  Under the whiskers, and all unseen, I knew that the skin was
taking on a purplish hue.

The captain, or Wolf Larsen, as men called him, ceased pacing and gazed
down at the dying man.  So fierce had this final struggle become that the
sailor paused in the act of flinging more water over him and stared
curiously, the canvas bucket partly tilted and dripping its contents to
the deck.  The dying man beat a tattoo on the hatch with his heels,
straightened out his legs, and stiffened in one great tense effort, and
rolled his head from side to side.  Then the muscles relaxed, the head
stopped rolling, and a sigh, as of profound relief, floated upward from
his lips.  The jaw dropped, the upper lip lifted, and two rows of
tobacco-discoloured teeth appeared.  It seemed as though his features had
frozen into a diabolical grin at the world he had left and outwitted.

Then a most surprising thing occurred.  The captain broke loose upon the
dead man like a thunderclap.  Oaths rolled from his lips in a continuous
stream.  And they were not namby-pamby oaths, or mere expressions of
indecency.  Each word was a blasphemy, and there were many words.  They
crisped and crackled like electric sparks.  I had never heard anything
like it in my life, nor could I have conceived it possible.  With a turn
for literary expression myself, and a penchant for forcible figures and
phrases, I appreciated, as no other listener, I dare say, the peculiar
vividness and strength and absolute blasphemy of his metaphors.  The
cause of it all, as near as I could make out, was that the man, who was
mate, had gone on a debauch before leaving San Francisco, and then had
the poor taste to die at the beginning of the voyage and leave Wolf
Larsen short-handed.

It should be unnecessary to state, at least to my friends, that I was
shocked.  Oaths and vile language of any sort had always been repellent
to me.  I felt a wilting sensation, a sinking at the heart, and, I might
just as well say, a giddiness.  To me, death had always been invested
with solemnity and dignity.  It had been peaceful in its occurrence,
sacred in its ceremonial.  But death in its more sordid and terrible
aspects was a thing with which I had been unacquainted till now.  As I
say, while I appreciated the power of the terrific denunciation that
swept out of Wolf Larsen’s mouth, I was inexpressibly shocked.  The
scorching torrent was enough to wither the face of the corpse.  I should
not have been surprised if the wet black beard had frizzled and curled
and flared up in smoke and flame.  But the dead man was unconcerned.  He
continued to grin with a sardonic humour, with a cynical mockery and
defiance.  He was master of the situation.



Wolf Larsen ceased swearing as suddenly as he had begun.  He relighted
his cigar and glanced around.  His eyes chanced upon the cook.

“Well, Cooky?” he began, with a suaveness that was cold and of the temper
of steel.

“Yes, sir,” the cook eagerly interpolated, with appeasing and apologetic
servility.

“Don’t you think you’ve stretched that neck of yours just about enough?
It’s unhealthy, you know.  The mate’s gone, so I can’t afford to lose you
too.  You must be very, very careful of your health, Cooky.  Understand?”

His last word, in striking contrast with the smoothness of his previous
utterance, snapped like the lash of a whip.  The cook quailed under it.

“Yes, sir,” was the meek reply, as the offending head disappeared into
the galley.

At this sweeping rebuke, which the cook had only pointed, the rest of the
crew became uninterested and fell to work at one task or another.  A
number of men, however, who were lounging about a companion-way between
the galley and hatch, and who did not seem to b
